you guys ready to go awesome so um yeah
so these guys are this this panel is all
about the macular collective which is
based in Rotterdam and we have three
members of the collective here Eric
Perrin Nicky Osmond and yours stre pose
hopefully I said that close enough and
the moderator for this panel is Sophie
lampeter there's actually one of my best
friend she's fantastic she is the
associate director at Swiss snacks she
was my favorite moderator from last year
so she's got a step of the game I think
they're gonna be going through they're
going to be doing this sort of like
organic format where they'll go through
a series of links and she'll also ask
questions hopefully we'll have a little
bit of time for the for audience
questions but we'll see how that goes
but if you haven't of course you all
walked in and you saw all of the kinetic
sculptures in the exhibition and these
are the people that made these and
brought them and we ship them all the
way from Rotterdam so please give a
round of applause for the macular
collective and Sophie thank you so much
was it thank you so much also for
putting this up and for running grey
area I think it's something that Tiffany
said as well before it's so important
that we are bringing disciplines
together and that we're starting to talk
the same language especially in in this
city where art and technology has been a
bit disconnected and I think grey area
is the center point for bringing that
together and also creating understanding
so my name is Sophie I work at Swiss
necks for those who don't know were
based here in San Francisco and it's
like an innovation outpost for
Switzerland and what we're doing is
we're connecting university startups
entrepreneurship innovation art and
design and we're doing that most often
in inter
disciplinary way because most of the
time a researcher knows already the
researcher living in another country
working on the same topic but maybe he
doesn't know that an artist or designer
is thinking about the same questions or
doesn't know that there is already a
company solution working on that same
idea and so I'm really really a believer
in interdisciplinary collaboration an
interdisciplinary approach is bringing
disciplines together to really tackle
world's problem I think there is often a
risk that we're as I said before that
we're not speaking the same language or
they were using different microscope
looking at something and not even
understanding that we're actually
looking at the same things and I'm happy
that I was chosen to moderate this panel
because i think the macular collective
does a fantastic job like that and i
think it's exactly what they're about in
my understanding is staying curious
taking things from all the different
disciplines bringing it together and and
also keep asking questions without
having the fear that this is maybe a
discipline that is not from yours so
bringing these things together and I'm
also happy that they're from the
Netherlands because the Netherlands are
supporting artists who travel to the US
and by making it happen that we can also
show their pieces here and I hope all of
you have that time to see some of them
it's the four big pieces when you come
right in maybe I say quickly something
about them so you can talk to them right
afterwards so the main piece when you
come in is from joris its revolve it's
that kinetic sculpture that turns then
there is liquid solid made by niki enter
it together which is todos freezing so
soap film installation there's own doll
tour made by you Eric that is here on
the side and then there is also the
multi studies that you see in the left
so after I think you guys are staying
here to Sunday there's also big
performance then so there will be around
chat with them and learn from them and
so that's what I was trying to do with
them today we said like hey let's just
talk about work that let's talk about
what you made let's talk about what
inspired you so we're gonna go
with a run-through of like experiences
and inspiration and your own work and I
think maybe start with your own work
whoever wants to kick off sure so my
name is Nikki Osmond and actually maybe
a real sort of macular collectivism is
based or is consist of six artists but
we all come from the same education and
namely art school called art science and
so we all did the same studies and we
found each other in this in this
communal how do you say Camino ideas of
our technology and perception and so one
of my works that was made during that
studies as a master was is called solace
and if you can run the video it's a
kinetic machine this put it on full
screen it's a kinetic machine that
consists of a water bath am filled with
soapy water and it lifts up a sheet of
soap film so if you know a soap bubble
it's the same but then a two-dimensional
screen so before are times I studied
film science so I have a lot in my work
the cinema cinematographic reference I'm
very excited about the talk by Jean
Youngblood tomorrow because my thesis
was on expanded cinema and synesthesia
in art and so I look a lot at the
cinematic apparatus and how you can
convey this into a space so to go out of
the cinema to work with the space and
basically i created this sort of set up
like a theater setup and to show you
this abstract experimental film of soap
soap fill so you look at a sheet of soap
film of i have to calculate in feet but
i think its nine feet 3 by 4 meters nine
by nine feet so it's a reference also to
this video this old video screen
and so the way it's been set up it's
been set up with the space and light and
and that's what brings forward these
iridescent colors that's in a rent of
the soap film and it will display this
colorful sheet of soap film but it also
has other aspects namely it will reflect
you it works as a mirror basically so
the audience that sense in front of it
now you see only this camera in front of
it but usually there's an audience in
front of it so you will also see this
distorted version of yourself so this is
like a continuous installation and why I
like this or why I chose this
installation version is that I like the
chicken it's more free you can come in
you can choose how long you want to stay
there I put up some benches because some
people really wanted to stay for a long
time so it's about creating this
meditative space and also from cinema
the vision is the main sense but what I
would like to do in my work is approach
all the senses so it's about this
sensorial experience and I think you
also noticed this in the exhibition
maybe the dominant one is vision but in
this insulation like before you enter
the space you will smell the soap so
also I try to approach all these other
senses also detect I'll sense the
humidity is raised to keep these soap
films up and so it's a very like glam
space and that you're being touched by
light so all these metaphorical thinking
about working differently with the space
and the senses and the sensorial
experience can you maybe say something
how this work led to the work that we
have in the show now so one of the works
is called liquid solid after this
experiment I had read somewhere so one
of them like how I work is that I'm
inspired by science and by scientific
research and natural phenomena and I
think this is also for a for the rest of
us the same and I had read somewhere
that you
can freeze soap bubble so I thought okay
I can do the same with the soap film but
you need minus 30 degrees Celsius I
don't know what this is in the Phantom
height but very really cold really cool
and so somebody suggested to me this
ahead proposes to so in the collective
we work together there's room for
collaborations that's the main part so
we talked about doing this project
together and somebody suggested that
there's this art science residency
artist in residence in the north of
Finland in the Arctic region where it
gets this cold during the winter and
they invite artists to come work and
collaborate in the lab with the
scientists or with the Arctic landscape
and so we went there and and and and
started to research the cinematic
qualities of freezing soap film so the
film you see here the installation is a
video installation of an 80-minute loop
the first part is still very colorful
you recognize the soap film but you see
that the viscosity has changed so that's
around minus 6 degrees and what happens
is the process just slows down so like
normally a soap phone would last a
minute this lasted like 30 minutes so we
took like a short example or 15-minute
take of that like you slowly see the
soap because of gravity it goes down and
it slowly starts to freeze and it
because viscosity becomes more therapy
instead of fluid and then the second
part where you see the crystals is where
it's actually like close to minus 25
degrees Celsius and then the iridescent
aspect of this opium is completely gone
and it starts to crystallize and freezes
quite quickly and then with that we made
a soundtrack because like we don't
explain what the process is we just
should we make a composition with the
images and make our own soundtrack so
the end result is not to show to
demonstrate this scientific process but
just to make an artwork with it
yeah maybe you want to show your work
that you brought with you jars um I can
talk a bit about the revolt piece let me
just see where it is or not maybe maybe
this is a good way to start like this is
a work I did some time ago it's called
phases order I'll play the video you can
see what it is it's a it's a kinetic
light sculpture and it's it consists of
96 panels that move was here in a minute
and the ID for this came from the
swarming phenomena that you see with
birds so I was looking at these patterns
and I wanted to capture that in a
mechanical sculpture so you see how they
move and they there's kind of this
algorithm going on that they are looking
at each other and they and they move
along along that way and what I what I
like about this is that when people see
it is they have the feeling that they
are looking at this kind of natural
phenomena but it's it's like all
completely artificial materials and I
think that's the part where I'm
interested in where these border is
between the natural and artificial and
how these have a certain relationship
maybe it's good to also see the revolt
piece moving i think maybe people saw it
here in the front it's the rotating LED
installation just gonna see where that
is in the computer so it's this piece
and for this the idea was to to make a
visual visual music piece we were
interested in the idea of making a music
440 I so we work with rhythm and
intensity to create this kind of
abstract experience and the second part
is that we wanted like we work before a
lot with images generated in the
computer and using projectors but we
wanted to try to to create some kind of
volume of screen that you really have
the feeling of this kind of 3d shape
that works in the space I think I think
a lot of the work that we do is relate
it to cinema but moving it into a
different space and I think would
revolve it's it's trying to create a
cinematic experience but making that as
a as a physical object can you show the
undulator piece so my work in the
exhibition is sort of reducing cinema to
its basic qualities light and a screen
and then introducing an element of
physics in there so there's a kinetic
element to it the it's a light source
that projects color and gradients onto a
moving reflective surface and what you
see on the screen is basically the the
physics that happen of the light source
being reflected or refracted from the
source and so part of it is about
perception also
I think can revolve the flickering of
the image you get these after images and
in my piece there's also a lot of
flickering where you your perceptual
system is being pushed to the limits and
I think a lot of the works in our
collective are about trying to push your
preceptory system or mess with your
preceptory system to to give you an
experience that you would not easily
have otherwise right that's also why a
lot of these words are hard to film
because you have to it's about this
physical experience also in that sense
like what you say about um we all grew
up in this both analog and then digital
world and I think a lot of our work is
returning to this physical component and
physical experience and the same as for
leaving the the cinema leaving the the
screen and trying to make this space
this environment that you can experience
with your whole body yeah I think
results are something that I series
always this relationship between a
natural phenomena and the Machine when
an artificial one and I thought
something very interesting you told me
yesterday is that a lot of people look
at his piece and actually think it's
some sort of algorithm that is producing
the images so we are already expecting
some sort of more technology behind
certain things and it's very similar
with your work maybe can speak a bit
about that yeah it's a funny thing that
when people see that work I have gotten
the question pretty often so what kind
of fluid dynamics simulation are you
using or what happened and it's and then
I explain to people what it is and they
still don't understand that there's no
software involved basically and it's
it's very strange that people are
conditioned to just think oh it's you
know art and technology there should be
some kind of high high tech software
involved but I I really love the idea of
just using simple simple means to to get
to a natural organic result
you get that since we're not using a
technology to promote the technology or
to like it's like it's like a tool for
us it's it's like how a painter would
use a paintbrush and it just gives us
more possibilities but the the main goal
is to make an artwork that can be
experienced and and that it should never
be about the technology itself maybe
you're as you can show a gut feeling so
on Sunday night we're doing a program of
experimental films that are made by us
and by other Dutch filmmakers and we're
doing also to live audio visual
performances and the piece that I'm
doing is called gut feeling and I
created this piece while I was at UCLA
and I stumbled into their nano labs the
california nanosystems institute where i
saw all these crazy machines and one
thing that hit me is that scientists are
like us they don't know what they're
doing they're they're looking for
something they don't always know exactly
what they're looking for and they're
hacking these machines together to find
something new and I really like that and
so one of my interests like visual
perception they had these amazing
microscopes there and so I started
chatting with one of the scientists
there who ran one of the labs and I
convince him to let me use his
microscope and and i ended up
collaborating with a synthetic biologist
who provided me with a genetically
modified bacteria and so i created a
film and it's also a live performance
that is based on movement and growth
experiments with these e coli bacteria
and so that is you know there's a lot of
sort of high-tech stuff involved in that
but the end result if you'll come on
sunday is it really meant as a
an artwork or perceptual experience can
you speak a bit about how the reaction
of the researchers were to your work or
your questions that you ask and how ur
day involves or how was the exchange um
so the person that I worked with who ran
the lab he there's at you silly there's
as arts I center so there is this setup
for artists and scientists to
collaborate and he's one of the main
people who's involved with that so he
was really open to the idea and he was
really encouraging me to use the lab one
of the thing was I could only use a lab
when there weren't any wasn't any
research being done so i was there
usually from like 12 at night till 6am
but that was that was a funny experience
alone alone all by myself yes but then I
also encountered some scientists were I
tried to sort of explain what I wanted
to do but it was really hard to convey
what my goal was they were interested in
having me there and they were happy to
have me around and explain everything to
me but I did feel that it was difficult
to have the exact conversation that I
wanted to have with them about what my
work was about it was well can't say I
totally understood exactly what they
were doing but it was easy to talk with
them about their work but the other way
around I had a bit more of difficulty
communicating that when I show the piece
I've had very interesting conversations
with people who work in the field of
microscopy or synthetic biology genetic
engineering so in the end the piece
works but while working in the lab it
you know you're you're you're out of
place a little bit yeah yeah I imagine
it takes a while until you start
speaking the same language yeah exactly
yeah yeah yeah yeah we've done the
several projects together maybe you
familiar with the artist in residency
program at CERN I think it's a fantastic
or at science program and they're very
it's a very small program so they're
very carefully like choosing artists
that are asking or working on specific
fields emerging them
the scientists and they also published a
so-called manifesto for art and science
collaboration and I remember it right
well quite well it had this three things
that art and science should not be and
it's at first our science shouldn't be
visualization shooting p for
communicating science second we the
scientific process that shouldn't be
just about the process that the artist
is using and the third one it it's a
problem when the science becomes the art
so when you just do like a big
microscopic picture blew it up and hang
it into a gallery and I don't know maybe
you can comment a bit on that or for
your experiences how to really make a
project where both sides are influenced
or interact or play video so you're
pushing both fields a bit further I
think it's really difficult actually it
happens a lot that it either becomes an
illustration for the scientist or the
the artist just take something and and
doesn't really like respect the science
or do something with it I think for a
lot of us though we sort of look at what
is happening in science and then create
our own idea of what that means and kind
of run with it is this this works for me
really well because I start with
something with it absolutely no
knowledge um whatsoever until or like
just one factor which grasped me and
like tickles me to to continue in that
field and then this allows for such a
freedom that I do things that in
scientists would probably never do
because they already know about
limitations certain limitations of the
material and I I just don't have that
knowledge allows you start to work and
plane so I think this freedom is very
important in creating the artwork and
that you are not limited by this already
knowledge of limitations of the
materials and just find new entries in
the work I think that can also be a
mutual thing for the scientists what's
interesting and because you approached
me because in your right like ensuring
the southam so film is actually a lot
used in science because of the looking
at turbulence how turbulence works and
fluid
amex so yeah in that sense that's
interesting for them and I don't know
it's I think it's difficult to create
this mutual collaboration that's really
about pushing both a in a barrel of a
manner mm yeah I think CERN is it may be
a good example you need time and money
that both parties can really work when
chili on it yeah yeah maybe we can talk
a bit about other people's work that
inspired you in that field of art tech
in science I asked them to each one of
them choose choose a piece that we could
show here and discuss a little bit what
the inspiration is or what they took
from it who wants to start um I think
it's good to look at this piece by
Thomas Wilfred he's like one of the
founders of this visual music fullscreen
fullscreen so it's it's it's a silent
piece and it's basically there's there
are light sources and he uses all these
mechanical rotating devices to create
this abstract light work one of his
ideas was he created this Lumia and it
was kind of this small television skill
object with the ID that people could
have that in their home and just to look
at it in the night instead of like this
television this was at the time when
television wasn't super common yet and
so he thought instead of television
everybody's gonna have this light art
device in their house and people are
gonna sit on the couch and watch light
shows yeah
I love that yeah would be a lot better I
guess yeah and so it actually under
later is heavily inspired by Thomas
Rupert so its work i was i was actually
building myself of small Lumia box and
sort of this is an accidental result of
me messing around with the with the
materials to build that kind of self I
think this this these accidents and
displaying and experimenting it's a it's
a big part of our work just playing with
materials with certain ideas concepts
and uh by playing finding out their
qualities and characteristics and
aspects so was it more like stumble over
in it and rather looking for something
that you already have in mind yeah and
again this is like this is cinema but
it's an extremely physical type of
cinema you know built out of lights and
and and objects moving moving objects so
that went from one is this this is like
36 40 something like that maybe the
video says it yeah i think this this is
one of his latest yeah so 48 yeah so for
me that's also one of the things that
I'm really interested in is like we work
in art and technology um and there's his
idea like oh we're doing the newest
latest thing but actually there's a
really big history to all of this and I
think it's really important to be aware
of that and and and it's also a lot of
Forgotten technology yeah that's very
interesting and to work with I think
also going back to to these pure things
like huh what slide how is it working
all these aspects yeah I think because I
like it that is that you can work with
very simple elements like I think most
of these work could it could have also
been done like decades ago although the
Arduino ever ask me goodbye makes it
easy but technically it's possible to do
these things maybe you can show the
Gordon pass quark
that this one so it's kind of hard to
find good footage of this but if you
scroll down all the way or far far far
so this is in 1968 there was this
exhibit in London cybernetics
serendipity uh that's like you know it's
famous in media art circles for being
one of the first big shows that showed
interactive installations and robotics
and all that kind of stuff and this is a
piece by Gordon Gordon Pask and I only
found out about it recently what it
really does because it's hard to find
good information on it there's a little
bit of information but so basically this
is a 5 mobiles three of them are female
two of them are male and they
communicate through shooting lights at
each other and reflecting them with
mirrors so again there's lights and
mirrors but this also includes to Gordon
Pask was cyber notation and so he was an
artist and a scientist at the same time
he was interested in psychology and so
this work is is a kinetic sculpture but
the females and males try to learn from
each other and try to develop a language
and so there's some computer far off
because at that time there weren't any
little Arduino is a raspberry PI's to
stick in there and they start off not
knowing about each other but through
feedback mechanisms they learn to
communicate with each other and so
certain movements start to happen more
often because they know that oh this way
I will be in touch with that guy in this
way I'll be in touch with with this guy
and so this again goes back to like this
is like a very interesting sort of way
of networking I guess and creating an
artificial language it's sort of a I
stuff but it's you know 1968 a piece but
what I really like about this way of
working is that you create this
generative system which at some point
will will run by itself by interaction
and and for us as humans
basically just like this generative
composition for lights and movement and
and it becomes a thing where they have
their own sort of secret language and I
really like that where the there's a
systems to systems language inside there
that we as humans we can look at it and
we can enjoy it but the machines are
talking among themselves and I really
love that idea i think is very poetic
very relevant again today yes I don't
you understand hot wok machines are you
kidding around us yeah yeah exactly yeah
so with the end with the UM the deep
deep learning learning yeah there are
even people using it don't quite know
know how it works yeah yeah we show the
cp's my curtain schlager so um when I
was talking about expanded a cinema this
for me is like and being immersed in a
space this for me was like the main
example that I experienced being
immersed in this sensory overload I
think for all of us yeah yeah so you may
scribe what it was for people who
haven't so um the piece is made by
curtain slacker who's based in Chicago
is originally from Austria he was part
of a duo called granular synthesis um
and then started to work on his own the
piece is a an installation that you can
experience it's a space filled with fog
and then you enter you enter actually by
holding a rope because you can't see too
far and the you can see about like five
inches the UH ninjas in front of you
dare with many people but you don't know
exactly where they are although you have
this sense of presence of other people
yeah definitely yeah and so what's on is
a composition for stroboscopic lights
and pulse lights and I'm what starts to
happen is because you
our eyes are in the fog is so thick the
stroboscopic lights will start to create
hallucinatory patterns in your eyes in
your vision and this is very intense
because you're already in a bit closed
off space because of the and then
these very intense button start to
visualize in your perception in front of
you and it's so you are completely
disoriented and you can wander through
space and yeah I don't know what happens
what happened to me is that maybe you
can show the film that people because
with all these things really hard to
it's actually like erasing the space
just taking the space away by blurring
here it's really hard to two films such
a buddy you can't film this so what he
did was make it the video with where
people explain how they experienced it
there's also a sound component to it
right yeah so there's a very present
yeah it's a very specific sound
composition that's also a pulsing and
you know the flickering light and the
pulsing sound sort of get your
brainwaves going in a very intense way I
guess I don't know I don't know how I
want to word it it's really hard to say
something smart about something that's
so like pewdie sensual it's just light
I know by all the images or what you
like create yeah
um it was the most insane thing I've
ever been a part of at first it was
extremely uncomfortable I really wanted
out the anxiety was almost scary he
opens the first door and it's like boom
what's your visibility starts going
you're kind of like okay well what's
what's happening you don't even know
where you are you lose your sense of
space-time motion I mean I didn't even
know he's in there for 20 minutes I
would have guessed like two minutes it
did feel a bit like death you know like
if you don't have a body is this what
your existence is like if you went to
heaven like it felt like it would be
like entering heaven I've never I've
never felt like that ever that like
happened so purely in your own brain
pinned that it's impossible to even
compare to anybody else's I'm just a
nothing I think we got we got the point
right yeah if you ever get the chance to
see it go see it cuz it's yeah it's
amazing it's really good yeah maybe we
can we only have five minutes left maybe
we can talk a little bit what's coming
up or any projects that you have in mind
I know you're dreaming about doing
something here in the US something
larger as a collective I think what part
of this tour is to to research the IDS
of creating a new sort of research lab
which which would work with a mixture
between new media art and different
kinds of land art we got interested in
this idea of using green energy sources
like Sun and wind power and kind of
harvest that and use that in setting
stuff in motion or are using it for for
audio-visual sculptures do you want to
show I just go maybe yeah because I did
one work which is kind of recent and is
this installation this was done in
Norway right in the top of Enki oconus
it's a commissioned work by this project
called dark ecology
and it's actually it's these 12 wind
turbines and they will rotate they will
generate energy and they will use this
energy for sound and light composition
inside the units there's also a light
sensor so they will influence each other
in the way they produce their sound and
so this actually heart like goes back to
the Gordon Pask work so directly I
really like that actually the the
nineteen sixty eight piece has so much
of these elements in it I can I can play
a bit so you can see it functioning
so this was in the in November and in
November in the Arctic region the Sun
doesn't rise anymore so you have a polar
night and which means that there's a
little bit of Twilight but the most of
the day it's it's dark and so it really
felt like this group of to me it felt
like a group of aliens landed on this
mountain and we're like trying to
communicate either with each other or
with us and was a really bizarre
experience it's like what one of the
main points of departure was like I was
invited there to just enjoy the first
journey that they organized and to just
get inspired by the region and we saw
the wall out there and it came to mind
to just like how would it be if there
would be some kind of manmade phenomena
somewhere in these in these mountains
there that you would have liked
functioning there under circum shirt
circumstances like so it's wind driven
but also it wouldn't work if it would be
light or if there was no wind so it's
like this this phenomena that you can
experience only when it's when
everything is in the in the right order
so you need a natural phenomena
amplified by human creation and the
Machine yeah beautiful I think is really
beautiful about it also like you can
just leave that there and nobody has to
watch it and it can take it can just be
there and live and I really I really
like that yes that's also the goal to
create this land art piece that can just
go and it self sustainable one yeah so
yeah by using green energy to create a
piece somewhere like we were thinking
out in Utah in the desert or in Joshua
Tree to research the possibilities of
setting up a man nature machine that
lives there and and you know you can go
visit it if you want but it just lives
there
yeah so that's that's that's coming up
we're going to go to Joshua Tree in next
week's someone I got ya do some research
to talk to people great we're excited to
see what's coming out of that so yeah
the three of them are here till sunday
talk to them and also sign up for the
performance on sunday and the screening
i think it would be very fantastic thank
you so much thank you so much for coming
all the way